Airflow db transfer script 1.10.14/15->2.0.1+ (#5869)
GoogleCloudPlatform/python-docs-samples: composer/tools/composer_db_transfer.md

# Composer database transfer: Airflow 1.10.14/15 -> Airflow 2.0.1+

This document describes usage of composer_db_transfer.py script.

Purpose of the script it to provide a tool to migrate the metadata database,
DAGs, data and plugins from Composer environments with Airflow 1.10.14/15 to
Composer environment with Airflow 2.0.1+.

Dedicated tool is needed as in-place upgrade is not supported between those
versions.

## Prerequisites

> 1.  Make sure you are authorized through `gcloud auth login` before invoking the
>     script (https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/auth/login). The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  [Make sure you are authorized](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/auth/login) through `gcloud auth login` before invoking the
    script . The
```

>     script requires permissions to access the Composer environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    script requires [permissions to access the Composer environment](https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/how-to/access-control)
```

    (roles/composer.environmentAndStorageObjectAdmin role is sufficient) and its
    GKE cluster (container.*).

1.  Make sure that you can access GKE cluster of Composer environment through
    kubectl (e.g. if you are not able to successfully execute
    `kubectl get pods`, the script will fail). "Unable to connect to the server:
    dial tcp [IP ADDRESS]:443: connect: connection timed out" reported by

>     kubectl indicates that kubectl can not connect to GKE cluster. Check
>     https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/private-clusters#cloud_shell
>     for instructions about setting up access to private GKE cluster if you have
>     private IP environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    kubectl indicates that kubectl can not connect to GKE cluster. [Refer to the documentation](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/private-clusters#cloud_shell) about setting up access to private GKE cluster if you have
    private IP environment.
```

1.  Supported source versions: all Composer versions with Airflow 1.10.14 or
    1.10.15

1.  Supported destination versions: all Composer versions with Airflow 2.0.1 and
    newer

1.  The script depends on Python 3.6 (or newer), gcloud and kubectl. Make sure
    you have all those tools installed.

> 1.  Make sure that your Composer environment is healthy ("Environment health",
>     "Database health" - see:
>     https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/monitoring-dashboard). If it is not
>     healthy, first step is to fix the environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Make sure that your Composer environment is healthy. Refer to [this documentation](https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/monitoring-dashboard) more information specific signals indicating good "Environment health" and "Database health". If your environment is not healthy, fix the environment before running this script.
```

1.  Make sure that you have write access to the current directory. The script
    exports KUBECONFIG environment variable to store credentials to the

>     Composer's GKE cluster in current directory (on the machine that executes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Composer's GKE cluster in the current directory (on the machine that executes
```

    the script). The purpose is not to interfere with existing GKE-related
    user's configuration.

1.  Pause the DAGs before exporting the database.

## Limitations

1.  Logs from old DAG executions are not transferred (but history of executions
    in the database is transferred).

1.  The script does not perform any DAG modifications, does not validate that
    the DAGs are suitable to run in Airflow 2.0 and does not verify that
    suitable dependencies are installed in target environment. Airflow
    [upgrade_check](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/upgrade-check.html)

>     might be used to troubleshoot DAG compatibility issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    can be used to troubleshoot DAG compatibility issues.
```

1.  `dag_code` and `serialized_dag` tables are not synchronized directly.
    Database entries for imported DAGs are created by Airflow in the new
    environment.

1.  The script does not prevent DAGs from being scheduled in both old and new

>     environment. If can be prevented e.g. by pausing the DAGs before exporting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    environment. This can be prevented by pausing the DAGs before exporting
```

    them and unpausing them in the new environment.

1.  Airflow web server in target environment might temporarily not be available

>     after the database transfer.

Reviewer: What is a reasonable wait time? Let users know when they should start to worry

1.  The environment might need some time to parse imported DAGs. As a result
    they might appear in the web UI with some delay.

> 

Reviewer: What is a reasonable wait time? Let users know when they should start to worry

> 1.  Import operation removes all records from the target environment. Files
>     existing in environment's bucket are not deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Import operation removes all records from the target environment. Files
    existing in the environment's bucket are not deleted.
```

Author: Each operation is referring to only one environment specified in parameters.

> 1.  The script does not override gcloud configuration and exports it's own
>     kubeconfig. Temporary files for GKE deployment and kubeconfig created in
>     working directory have unique names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  The script does not override gcloud configuration and exports it's own
    kubeconfig. Temporary files for GKE deployment and kubeconfig are created in the
    working directory have unique names.
```

1.  File with fernet key created by export operation is not deleted by import
    operation.

## Usage

### Export from an old environment (Airflow 1.10.14/15)

CSV files with exported database are stored as /export/tables/[TABLE NAME].csv
in the environment's bucket. dags, plugins and data directories are stored in

> /export/dirs in the environment's bucket.

Reviewer: Is this something a user will do or something that already exists?

> File with a fernet key is going to be created on the machine executing the
> script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A file with a fernet key is going to be created on the machine executing the
script.
```

```
python3 composer_db_transfer.py export \
    --project [PROJECT NAME] \
    --environment [ENVIRONMENT NAME] \
    --location [REGION] \

>     --fernet-key-file [PATH TO FERNET KEY FILE - TO BE CREATED]

Reviewer: I figured out the answer to the second question! I realize this is the export so it's the old. Might not hurt to update it to say `[EXISTING ENVIRONMENT NAME]`

>     --fernet-key-file [PATH TO FERNET KEY FILE - TO BE CREATED]

Reviewer: Also, if this fernet-key-file is going to be created, is this just the path on the local machine where we want it to end up?

>     --fernet-key-file [PATH TO FERNET KEY FILE - TO BE CREATED]

Author: 1. They don't need to be in the same project.
2. In both cases (export and import) we operate on existing environments.
3. Fernet key file is created (during export phase) and read from (during import) local machine invoking the script. It is mentioned in "Export from an old environment (Airflow 1.10.14/15)" section.

I updated description of parameters to "SOURCE ENVIRONMENT NAME" / "TARGET ENVIRONMENT NAME". I don't want to use "existing" / "new" wording as it may imply that new environment is created in import phase.

```

### Copying the files between the environments

Exported files can be copied to the target environment, e.g. with:

```

> gsutil -m cp -r gs://[SOURCE ENV BUCKET NAME]/export gs://[TARGET ENV BUCKET NAME]/import

Reviewer: Will users have prepared their environments so that their DAGs and other files are in this `/export` bucket?

Author: This is what export operation is doing. Export is about storing database, DAGs, data and plugins in export "directory" of environment's bucket.

```

### Import to a new environment (Airflow 2.0.1+)

CSV files that should be imported are expected to be stored as
/import/tables/[TABLE NAME].csv in the environment's bucket. dags, plugins and
data directories that should be imported are expected to be stored in
/import/dirs in the environment's bucket.

`fernet-key-file` parameter specifies path to the fernet key file of the source
environment on the machine executing the script. It is created during export
phase.

```
python3 composer_db_transfer.py import \
    --project [PROJECT NAME] \

>     --environment [ENVIRONMENT NAME] \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    --environment [NEW ENVIRONMENT NAME] \
```

Author: I want to avoid word "new" as it might suggest that the environment is created by import operation.
I'll use "source" and "target" words.

    --location [REGION] \
    --fernet-key-file [PATH TO FERNET KEY FILE FROM SOURCE ENVIRONMENT]
```

## Troubleshooting

1.  Make sure that all prerequisites are met - you have the right permissions
    and tools, you are authorized and the environment is healthy.

1.  "Unable to connect to the server: dial tcp [IP ADDRESS]:443: connect:
    connection timed out" might indicate that network settings prevent kubectl
    from connecting to GKE cluster. This is especially likely if you have a
    private IP environment. In such a case additional configuration might be

>     required. Check
>     https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/private-clusters#cloud_shell
>     for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    required. Check [the documentation](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/private-clusters#cloud_shell) for more information.
```

> 1.  If the error seems to be related to required permissions, check
>     https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/how-to/access-control. The script
>     requires permissions to access the Composer environment and its GKE cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  If the error seems to be related to required permissions, double check that you have permissions to [access the Composer environment and its GKE cluster](https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/how-to/access-control).
```

1.  "HTTPError 403: The service account does not have the required permissions
    for the bucket" might indicate that imported data was not properly copied to
    the import "directory" in environment's bucket (may actually not exist at
    all).

1.  Exit code 137 reported from command executed in the GKE cluster might
    indicate that the relevant workload was terminated. Possibly the environment
    is not healthy.

> 1.  Check https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/getting-support if you need
>     additional help. When contacting Google Cloud Support, make sure to provide
>     all relevant information including complete output from this script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Follow up with [support channels](https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/getting-support) if you need additional help. When contacting Google Cloud Support, make sure to provide all relevant information including complete output from this script.
```

    `kubectl get pods`, the script will fail). "Unable to connect to the server:
    dial tcp [IP ADDRESS]:443: connect: connection timed out" reported by
    kubectl indicates that kubectl can not connect to GKE cluster.
    [Refer to the documentation](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/private-clusters#cloud_shell)
    about setting up access to private GKE cluster if you have private IP environment.

1.  Supported source versions: all Composer versions with Airflow 1.10.14 or
    1.10.15

1.  Supported destination versions: all Composer versions with Airflow 2.0.1 and
    newer

1.  The script depends on Python 3.6 (or newer), gcloud and kubectl. Make sure
    you have all those tools installed.

1.  Make sure that your Composer environment is healthy. Refer to
    [this documentation](https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/monitoring-dashboard)
    for more information specific signals indicating good "Environment health" and
    "Database health". If your environment is not healthy, fix the environment before
    running this script.

1.  Make sure that you have write access to the current directory. The script

>     exports KUBECONFIG environment variable to store credentials to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    exports `KUBECONFIG` environment variable to store credentials to the
```

    they might appear in the web UI with some delay (depending on a number and
    complexity of the DAGs).

1.  Import operation removes all records from the target environment. Files
    existing in the environment's bucket are not deleted.

1.  The script does not override gcloud configuration and exports it's own
    kubeconfig. Temporary files for GKE deployment and kubeconfig created in the
    working directory have unique names.

1.  File with fernet key created by export operation is not deleted by import
    operation.

## Usage

### Export from an old environment (Airflow 1.10.14/15)

As a result of export operation CSV files with exported database are stored as
/export/tables/[TABLE NAME].csv in the environment's bucket. DAGs, plugins and
data directories are stored in /export/dirs in the environment's bucket.

A file with a fernet key is going to be created on the machine executing the
script.

```
python3 composer_db_transfer.py export \
    --project [PROJECT NAME] \
    --environment [SOURCE ENVIRONMENT NAME] \
    --location [REGION] \
    --fernet-key-file [PATH TO FERNET KEY FILE - TO BE CREATED]
```

> 

Reviewer: Suggestion mode fails with code blocks but I would add this below:

Example:

```
python3 composer_db_transfer.py export \
    --project my-project \
    --environment my-airflow-1-composer-environment \
    --location europe-west4 \
    --fernet-key-file ./my-fernet-key
```

### Copying the files between the environments

Exported files can be copied to the target environment, e.g. with:

```
gsutil -m cp -r gs://[SOURCE ENV BUCKET NAME]/export gs://[TARGET ENV BUCKET NAME]/import
```

> 

Reviewer: Example: 
```
gsutil -m cp -r gs://europe-west4-my-airflow-1-composer-environment-123456abc-bucket/export gs://europe-west4-my-airflow-2-composer-environment-789xyz-bucket/import
```

### Import to a new environment (Airflow 2.0.1+)

CSV files that should be imported are expected to be stored as
/import/tables/[TABLE NAME].csv in the environment's bucket. dags, plugins and
data directories that should be imported are expected to be stored in
/import/dirs in the environment's bucket.

`fernet-key-file` parameter specifies path to the fernet key file of the source
environment on the machine executing the script. It is created during export
phase.

```
python3 composer_db_transfer.py import \
    --project [PROJECT NAME] \
    --environment [TARGET ENVIRONMENT NAME] \
    --location [REGION] \
    --fernet-key-file [PATH TO FERNET KEY FILE FROM SOURCE ENVIRONMENT]
```

> 

Reviewer: Example:

```
python3 composer_db_transfer.py import \
    --project my-project \
    --environment my-airflow-2-composer-environment \
    --location europe-west4 \
    --fernet-key-file ./my-fernet-key
```
